Docker – Virtualization redefined.
Docker is one of the amazing technology I have learned and still learning in the recent past. It was introduced to me my my colleagues. Initially the concept was a little vague and to me virtualization was only VM’s or hypervisors. I have never thought in terms of containers and after using docker, am totally in love with it. Docker enables packaging, building and running your application in virtual container that can run on any underlying hardware. 

I started using docker initially to setup my development environment. Ours is a web application which involves php-fpm, nginx, mysql db, redis cache and more. So in order to setup a working development environment I had to install each of these in my local machine. I encountered a lot of issues with version mismatches and underlying operating system not supporting a particular flavor of nginx and more. That’s when Docker came into picture. With docker, I was able to do all these in just 10 mins and my development enviroment was ready. All I had to do is to pull the correct docker images from the docker repository and run few docker commands and that it. My application was up and running in the local. On top of all, the containers were light weight and they occupied very little disk space. I was also able to allocate memory based on the type of operation done in the container. For example, I allocated more memory to the php-fpm container as it does the bulk of the logic in my application. This container virtualization and container porting still makes me think docker is great. Docker now has a wide variety of features that enables to do all these in a more efficient way. It also enables contianer management within a cluster using docker-swarm. I haven’t used docker-swarm yet but I will be using it for sure in future.

We are using docker only in our development enviroment, as our team feels docker is still in its beta and its not stable enough to be in production. I am strongly against this consense as I feel if it is used correctly it will work in any environment, including production. One of the pitfalls that my team faced during that time was debugging a docker container. There was not GUI and the only way to get into a container was using a binary docker-enter or using SSH. This was troublesome and the logs weren’t clear. But now docker has a GUI called kitematic that will allow you to enter the container and debug at your ease. I will definetely be using it in future, in fact, am already using it to try out its new features. I am sure, one day I will convince my team to use docker and we will use it in production soon.

